---
title: "Introduction"
teaching: 0
exercises: 0
questions:
- "What is SQL?"
- "How can I return specific columns from a table?"
- "How can I return specific rows from a table?"

objectives:
- "Define  SQL" 

- "Explain how SQL is used to access relational database tables"

- "Understand the difference  between DDL and DML"

- "Create simple SQL queries to return rows and columns from existing tables"

- "Construct more complex logical expressions for use in where clauses"

- "Return sorted results from a query"

keypoints:
- "Strictly speaking SQL is  a standard, not a particular implementation"
- "SQL implementation are sufficiently close that you only have to learn SQL once"
- "The DDL constructs are used to create tables and other database objects"
- "The DML constructs, typically the SELECT statement is used to retrieve data from one or more tables"
---

## Definition of SQL 
SQL or Structured Query Language is an internatinal standard for manipulating data in a relational database.
Each Relational Database system like Oracle, MySQL or SQLite implements its own variation of the standard.

Fortunateley for the types of commands and queries that we will to write, all of the implementations are much in agreement.
The relatively straightforward Select queries we will be writing to access data in our SQLite database will execute un-altered in many of the other environments.

Essentially you only have to learn SQL once.

## SQL and Relational database tables

The strength of SQL is that a single SQL statement or query can request data be returned from one or much of the tables in the database. You can essentially define the relationships between tables on-the-fly as part of your query statement.

## DDL and DML

DDL stands for Data Definition Language. It is the set of SQL comands used to create alter of delete database objects such as tables.

DML stands for Data Manipulation Language. Principally this is the SELECT command which is used to extract data items from one or more of the database tables.

## Simple SQL queries useing the Select statement

For the rest of this lesson we will be looking at the SELECT statement.

To follow along, you should open the SQLite plugin and connect to the SN7577 database.

In SQL, querying data is performed by a SELECT statement. A select statement has 6 key components;

~~~ 
SELECT colnames
FROM tablename
GROUP BY colnames
WHERE conditions
HAVING conditions
ORDER BY colnames
~~~ 
{: .sql}

In practice very few queries will have all of these clauses in them simplifying many queries. On the other hand, conditions in the WHERE clause can be very complex and if you need to JOIN two or more tables together then more clauses (JOIN and ON) are needed.

All of the clause names above have been written in uppercase for clarity. SQL is not case sensitive. Neither do you need to write each clause on a new line, but it is often clearer to do so for all but the simplest of queries.

In this lesson we will start with the very simple and work our way up to the more complex.

The simplest query is effectively one which returns the contents of the whole table

~~~ 
Select *
From SN7577
~~~ 
{: .sql}

It is better practice and generally more efficient to explicitly list the column names that you want returned.

~~~ 
Select web1, web2, web3, web4
From SN7577
~~~ 
{: .sql}

The '*' character acts as a wildcard meaning all of the columns but you cannot use it as a general wildcard.
So for example, the following is not valid.
~~~ 
Select w*
From SN7577
~~~ 
{: .sql}

If you run it you will get an error.
When an error does occur you will see an alert box pop-up with a rather technical an unreadable error message in it. How ever when you close it, you will see a far simpler interpretation of the error in the Last Error text box. 

<<Exercise>>
## Using more complex logical expressions in the `where` clause

## Sorting results 
